# `ttc-haskell` Design Log

Author
: Travis Cardwell

Date
: 2019-11-23

## History

When I started programming in Haskell, I used `Show` and `Read` instances as a
way to render and parse strings in whatever format worked best for my
programs.  As I gained experience, I started to implement `Render` and `Parse`
type classes in my projects.  My initial motivation was to avoid use of the
`String` type, but I found that reserving `Show` and `Read` instances for
debugging/development while using `Render` and `Parse` instances for other
purposes is convenient.  I was already accustomed to the distinction from the
`__repr__` and `__str__` methods in Python.

After many years of writing `Render` and `Parse` implementations in various
projects, I decided to create a library for the purpose.  I think it provides
enough benefit to justify an additional dependency.

I hoped to name the package `textual` but found that such a package already
existed.  I am generally not a fan of using initialisms or acronyms for
project names, but I decided to use one in this case because it can also be
used as a relatively short name for the qualified import.

## Design Goals

The primary design goal is to provide `Render` and `Parse` type classes for
conversion between data types and custom-purpose strings.  Using them with
human-readable strings is the most common use case, but it is not a
requirement.  These type classes are separate from the `Show` and `Read` type
classes, which can be used for debugging/development, with automatically
derived instances in many cases.

The secondary design goal is to make it easier to work with the many textual
data types that are used in Haskell, which seems to be a common source of
frustration.  While using `Text` for all text is a noble goal (when working
with encodings that are isomorphic with a subset of Unicode), one often has to
deal with other types when working with third-party libraries.  For example,
most libraries (including this one) use the `String` type for error messages,
many libraries have data types that require use of `Show` and `Read`
instances, some libraries use `ByteString` because they support more than
text, `FilePath` is a type alias for `String`, etc.  The `Render` and `Parse`
type classes make it easy to create instances via whatever textual data type
is most natural, with minimal boilerplate.  One does not need to keep in mind
which types are used in the implementations, as TTC conversion should "do the
right thing."

Choosing which types to support in the `Textual` type class was not obvious.
I often make heavy use of `Builder` types, so early implementations included
support for such types.  I eventually refactored the code so that `Textual`
only converts between what I consider the core textual data types and use
separate functions for conversion to/from `Builder` and `Short` types.  The
refactored code is more elegant and just as easy to use.  The disadvantage is
that I am not able to take advantage of the different `Text` `Builder` type
constructors; all conversions are via lazy `Text`.  If this causes an
unacceptable hit on performance, I am open to changing the design in a future
version.
