# `ttc-haskell` Design Log

Author
: Travis Cardwell

Date
: 2021-06-09

## Feedback

The first public release of TTC was on November 23, 2019.  I did not make a
widespread announcement at that time because there were some things that I
wanted to get done before doing so.  Friends and coworkers knew about the
project, but I did not get any feedback.

It took longer than I expected before I was ready to make a widespread
announcement, which I did on June 3, 2021 accompanying the `1.0.0.0` release.
I was able to receive a lot of great feedback from the Haskell community!
Based on this feedback, I decided to make one minor change and two major
changes, to be released in the `1.1.0.0` release.

## Changes

### Default Instances

When implementing a shared library, one must be careful about defining
instances to type classes.  Since a type can have at most one instance of a
type class, users of a library are not able to write their own instance for a
type if an instance already exists.

TTC exported a `Data.TTC.Instances` module that provided some default `Render`
and `Parse` instances for some core types.  Use of these instances was
optional, as a convenience to users.  There was concern that users might
import the module within the implementation of a library, causing frustration
to users of that library.

I changed the implementation to provide default instances instead, removing
the `Data.TTC.Instances` module.  With the new implementation, users can load
the instance for a specific type (as opposed to all the core types) using a
line like the following:

```haskell
instance TTC.Render Int64
```

Such an orphan instance is still not advised in a shared library, but this
method makes it more likely that the user will see the warning in the API
documentation.

### Builder and Short `Textual` Instances

The initial design of TTC included `Textual` instances of builder types, but
I ended up removing them and using auxiliary functions instead  because it
made the implementation more elegant.  After hearing some feedback, I thought
about the design again and decided to add instances for builder and short
types.  The implementation is less elegant, but having these instances can
make usage of the type class more concise and may even improve performance in
some cases.

### `HasCallStack` Usage

Through the feedback, I learned of many other Haskell libraries that provide
type classes for type conversion.  Taylor Fausak told me about his
[witch](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/witch) library and asked me what I
thought about it.  (It is a nice library!)  Reading through the code, I
noticed that he uses `HasCallStack` with unsafe functions, which results in
better error messages on failure.  I like that idea and added `HasCallStack`
constraints to the unsafe functions in TTC.
